## Analysis of Algorithms (Analysis of Loops):

In the previous post, we discussed analysis of loops. Many algorithms are recursive in nature. When we analyze them, we get a recurrence relation for time complexity. We get running time on an input of size n as a function of n and the running time on inputs of smaller sizes. For example in Merge Sort, to sort a given array, we divide it in two halves and recursively repeat the process for the two halves. Finally we merge the results. 

Time complexity of Merge Sort can be written as T(n) = 2T(n/2) + cn. There are many other algorithms like Binary Search, Tower of Hanoi, etc.


#### **There are mainly three ways for solving recurrences.**

**1) Substitution Method:** 
   
We make a guess for the solution and then we use mathematical induction to prove the guess is correct or incorrect.

    For example consider the recurrence T(n) = 2T(n/2) + n

    We guess the solution as T(n) = O(nLogn). Now we use induction
    to prove our guess.

    We need to prove that T(n) <= cnLogn. We can assume that it is true
    for values smaller than n.

    T(n) = 2T(n/2) + n
        <= 2cn/2Log(n/2) + n
        =  cnLogn - cnLog2 + n
        =  cnLogn - cn + n
        <= cnLogn

**2) Recurrence Tree Method:**

In this method, we draw a recurrence tree and calculate the time taken by every level of tree. Finally, we sum the work done at all levels. To draw the recurrence tree, we start from the given recurrence and keep drawing till we find a pattern among levels. The pattern is typically a arithmetic or geometric series.

**3) Master Method:**

Master Method is a direct way to get the solution. The master method works only for following type of recurrences or for recurrences that can be transformed to following type.

    T(n) = aT(n/b) + f(n) where a >= 1 and b > 1

There are following three cases:
1. If f(n) = Θ(n$^{c}$) where c < Logba then T(n) = Θ(n$^{Logba}$)
2. If f(n) = Θ(n$^{c}$) where c = Logba then T(n) = Θ(n$^{c}$Log n)
3. If f(n) = Θ(n$^{c}$) where c > Logba then T(n) = Θ(f(n))